---
layout: post
title: "Hello World"
date: 2012-12-31 14:34
comments: true
categories: octopress
---

<!---
Apparently Markdown syntax does not have any shorthand for comments
-->

<!---
First 7 lines of this file were generated by command invocation:
  % rake new_post["Hello World"]
-->

First post!
I am attempting to move my blog to GitHub Pages.

After seeing the results of others, I figure I will start with Octopress
and see how that goes.

<!-- more -->

Just so I can remind myself of the Octopress basics in the immediate future:

* Much of the page generation is controlled by configuration file `_config.yml`

* The content is all stored in `source/_posts/`

* This particular entry corresponds to the file `2012-12-31-hello-world.markdown`

* The first 7 lines of that file were originally generated via the
  `rake` command invocation:

      % rake new_post["Hello World"]

* The command `rake generate` will convert the source into static html pages.

* After generating the file (and during subsequent editting), one can preview
  the state locally in a local Ruby webserver via:

      % rake preview

  and then [browsing localhost port 4000](http://localhost:4000/).
  The `rake preview` invocation will continuously monitor your post
  source files so that you can keep working on your post and then
  reload in your web browser without rerunning `rake` itself.

* The command `rake deploy` is supposed to deploy the content into its intended
  live location.  I have been having difficulty using this command,
  in part because I think it is written assuming you have your ssh-key
  already set up and integrated with github (or something similar) so that
  there would be no password prompts.

  * But of course I have not done this yet.

  * One important detail about `rake deploy` with github pages is that
    the `_deploy/` subdirectory is itself a clone of the targetted
    github repository, with the `gh-pages` branch checked out.
    This can be confusing if your main source tree (the parent
    directory of `_deploy/`) is itself the same repository as the
    targetted github repository.

* Update: `rake deploy` just worked fine for me, password prompts and all.
  I think my earlier difficulty was an artifact of some previous bad
  state, one of either:

  * I had put in a malformatted url for the target repository

  * My target repository already had a `gh-pages` branch (from earlier
    testing) that needed to be pulled-and-merged (or discarded in some
    fashion, which was what my merge amounted to).

* Update (26 march 2012): there are still some hiccups with `rake deploy`;
  you need to be careful about what you store in the `source/` directory.
  In particular, I was working on a draft post and threw various
  source files that I was hacking on in the same directory, along with
  some `.gitignore` files so that `git` would ignore build products
  generated when I compiled the source (to binaries or jars or fasls...).

  The headache came when I did `rake deploy`, and hit this error:
  
  ```bash
% rake deploy
cp -r source/_posts/.gitignore public/_posts/.gitignore
rake aborted!
No such file or directory - public/_posts/.gitignore
/Users/pnkfelix/Dev/Sites/pnkfx-blog/Rakefile:230:in `block (2 levels) in <top (required)>'
/Users/pnkfelix/Dev/Sites/pnkfx-blog/Rakefile:229:in `block in <top (required)>'
/Users/pnkfelix/Dev/Sites/pnkfx-blog/Rakefile:219:in `block in <top (required)>'
Tasks: TOP => copydot
(See full trace by running task with --trace)
%
  ```

  The problem here, as far as I can tell, is that octopress
  is aggressively trying to copy over all dotfiles it can find
  ([Octopress Issue 104](https://github.com/imathis/octopress/issues/104))
  and that code was not written to create any subdirectories as
  necessary.

  My Ruby development knowledge is sufficiently under-developed that I
  am not going to try to fix this myself.  Instead I have simply
  moved all of the source code I was hacking *out* of the `source/`
  directory and into a separate `hacks/` directory.
  This seems to have addressed the problem; I have also filed
  [an issue](https://github.com/imathis/octopress/issues/1151)
  for this with Octopress.
